---
layout: post
title:  "Studying for the GMAT"
date:   2022-09-05 22:15:09 -0000
categories: MBA
tags: [MBA, education, school, b school, Masters, Graduate, Undergraduate]
feature_image: images/library.jpg

---
## Overview
So, you've advanced past the decision to get an MBA, you know why you're starting on this masochistic journey and maybe (or maybe not) you have an idea of what B-School you're thinking of.  I recommend you have at least an idea of what schools you're considering before you prep for the GMAT. <!--more--> The program type (part time, full time, emba, etc.) and the school's requirements both factor into the score you should shoot for.  Normally, schools post their GMAT statistics and I encourage you to check them out to give an idea of your target range.  Still, some notes:

* **Top 10 schools tend to be super competitive.**
    * Applications are all encompassing (career experience, recommendations, etc.) but you will likely need a very good GMAT to compete.  For example, [U of Chicago's Booth  school had a median GMAT of 740][uofc]. Not a lot of room for error there!
* **Top 25 schools are still competitive but more down to earth.**
    * The median at [Vanderbilt (#24 on Bloomberg's list) was still an impressive 700][vandy]
* **Beyond the top 25, GMAT tends to weigh less heavily** in the application and be a more moderate target
* **Also, note that especially if you have lots of experience, GMAT tends to weigh less** (because presumably you're farther from school and thus, less likely to be ready for this kind of test anymore). For example, [UT Austin has a 704 GMAT average for its traditional MBA but no requirement at all for the eMBA][ut].
* **Make flashcards as you study.**  Every time something strikes you as hard or useful, write it down and drill those in spare time.

One last note: I studied hard and long for my GMAT and as a result, I received a full 1/3 of my tuition in scholarships.  At the MBA level, scholarships are not common from what I've heard so my point is that GMATs can be helpful apart from hitting the minimum to get accepted.

## Test Prep
If you want a 700+ (in the 10 weeks prep I took), here are the best pointers I can give you.

First, we'll talk materials.  I used only two: [Kaplan GMAT Premier][kaplan] which I highly recommend especially with the six practice tests which are super handy (I think this has changed to [GMAT Prep Plus][gpp] here) and the [GMAT Official Guide][gmatog] (ultimate authoritative guide since it's written by the testers themselves.  Note the GMAT site has a couple practice exams as well (though I recommend waiting to use those since they are adaptive and thus, the most realistic to the actual exam).

Next, prep methodology.  Practice as you play (thanks high school football).  That is, in general, try to study or take practice exams exactly as you will take the test.  Quiet study area, no interruptions, don't put music on, time your practice tests, etc.  To study for my GMAT, I stole from two great blog posts now years old. **READ THESE: One is still up [here][post1] but the other site doesn't exist so I'm adding [here](/seven_timelines/reference_pages/ursula_post_archive.html)**. 

Sincerely, both are great and you should read them to round out what I'm saying.  You'll notice many common themes in our recommendations and get pointers for stuff I don't cover.

**Here's the quick summary:**
* Practice test: see where you're weak
* Practice weakest first, 30 questions/day every day
* Move through each of four sections from hardest to easiest, continuing to do practice from the previous sections as you go (building up more and more)
* Practice test on the weekends (saving the GMAT test for the final practice one week from exam day)

To study, I used a progressive system (in alignment with those posts I mentioned).  To begin, **I burned one of two practice tests from GMAT** to find my strengths and weaknesses (my other test was saved as my very last practice).  In my case, quant was clearly the weaker subject and so I started there.  I can't recall if Data Sufficiency or Problem Solving were weaker (I think it was PS) but that's the one I started with.  My practice consisted of approximately **30 problems per day every day** including weekends unless I was practice testing.  

I divided my study into **four sections** (DS, PS, Reading Comprehension and Critical Reading/Sentence Correction).  I proceeded to add a new section every couple weeks, **still doing 5-10 practice from each of the previous sections.**  By the end, you're doing more work but you're also much faster and anything new should be your strongest subject so if you don't do as many on that subject, no big deal.

I then **mixed in practice tests evenly as I went.**  I had seven left (6 Kaplan, 1 GMAT).  The GMAT is adapative and on a computer and closest to test conditions.  I recommend saving that to give the most accurate final practice.  Don't do closer than one week out from the actual test or it will psych you out/stress you out.  Back one week from your test, and then take a practice every weekend preceding that to start with the (much harder) Kaplan tests.

I'm avoiding, in this post, specific advice on each section (e.g., how to tackle Critical Reasoning questions strategically) since the posts I linked do a great job if you want that content.  I do highly recommend it though.  As you'll see in Kaplan, there are specific strategies to how to work these questions that will save time and give you at least a couple extra correct answers.  The test is hard but moderately predictable and you can use that.

Note that I have not even mentioned integrated reasoning or AWA in here because frankly, I don't think any program really takes them that seriously.  You can study if you want but I think it's likely a waste, honestly.  AWA: hit three points in a coherent essay and you're fine.  IR, use the practice exams and that's it.

So, hopefully that is helpful to you.  Once again, I encourage you to read the attached posts and take time to preset your personal strategy based on availability, desired score, etc.  The GMAT is an important barrier to acceptance to your target school, financial aid, etc. and it's worth planning for.

Please use my contact information if you have questions!

[kaplan]: https://www.amazon.com/GMAT-Premier-2017-Practice-Tests/dp/1506203213/ref=sr_1_4?crid=1RPQDQ8ALTHKQ&keywords=kaplan+gmat+premier&qid=1662438013&sprefix=kaplan+gmat+premier%2Caps%2C112&sr=8-4
[gpp]: https://www.amazon.com/GMAT-Prep-Plus-2022-2023-Strategies-dp-1506277233/dp/1506277233/ref=dp_ob_title_bk
[gmatog]: https://www.amazon.com/GMAT-Official-Guide-2022-Bundle/dp/1119794013/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=gmat+official+guide&qid=1662438128&s=books&sprefix=gmat+offic%2Cstripbooks%2C102&sr=1-1
[uofc]: https://www.chicagobooth.edu/mba/full-time/admissions/class-profile
[vandy]: https://business.vanderbilt.edu/mba/class-profile/
[ut]: https://fortune.com/education/business/mba/rankings/university-of-texas-austin-mccombs/
[post1]: https://www.beatthegmat.com/720-96th-percentile-how-i-beat-the-gmat-t13.html
[post2]: /reference_pages/ursula_post_archive.html